SENDAS: Scalable ENrichment for mobility DAta Sets
Abstract. Recent years of technological advancement and popularization has
grown the availability of mobility data, collected from different sources. Analyzing such data is an active research and industrial development field, with a
diverse range of applications. However, trajectory data has also been following
the Big Data trend, and currently existing tools lack of scalability. To cover this
gap, we introduce Sendas – Scalable ENrichment for mobility DAta Sets –, a
new Scala library built around the Apache Spark framework, enabling parallel
and distributed execution for mobility analysis techniques. We present definitions that extend state-of-the-art notions of trajectory naming, flow calculation
and mobility motif identification, and also conduct comparative performance
evaluation, finding running time improvements of 4 to 6 times when compared
to non-parallel execution.

Improving Rule Based and Equivalent Decision
Simplifications for Bloat Control in Genetic
Programming Using a Dynamic Operator
Abstract. Bloat is a common issue regarding Genetic Programming
(GP), specially noted in Symbolic Regression (SR) problems. Due to
this, GP tends to generate a huge amount of ineffective code that could
be avoided or removed. Code editing is one of many approaches to
avoid bloat. The objective in this strategy is to mutate or remove subtrees which do not contribute to the final solution. Two known methods
of redundant code removal, the Rule Based Simplification (RBS) and
Equivalent Decision Simplification (EDS) are extended in a new operator presented in this paper, called Dynamic Operator with RBS and EDS
(DORE). This operator gives the algebraic simplification table used by
RBS the potential to learn from reductions performed by EDS. An initial benchmark highlighted how the RBS table can grow as much as 86%
with DORE, and reducing the time spent on simplification by 16.83%.
Experiments with the other three SR problems were performed showing
a considerable improvement on fitness of the generated programs, besides
a slight reduction in the population of the average tree size.
Keywords: Genetic Programming · Bloat Control · Code Editing.

Novel Three-Input Gates for Silicon Quantum Dot
Abstract—Atomic Silicon Quantum Dot (SQD) is a prominent
alternative to the current Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) transistor due to the low energy consumption
and high integration potential. This emerging technology applies
Silicon Dangling Bonds (DBs) that behave similarly to quantumdots. Moreover, it does not require cryogenic temperatures,
unlike other quantum-dot-based approaches. This paper proposes
two novel 3-input gates, ORAND(x, y, z) := x ∧ (y ∨ z) and
ANDOR(x, y, z) := x ∧ y ∨ z. Hence, we compare these 3-input
designs with the equivalent circuits composed of 2-input gates.
We use the state-of-the-art simulator, named SiQAD, to design
and validate our experiments. Our main contribution is the novel
3-input gate designs that provide area and energy reductions. We
achieve an average of 53% energy savings for all 3-input gates
compared to the equivalent circuit built with 2-input gates.

Analyzing the Impact of Bots During the 2018 Brazilian
Presidential Election Based on YouTube Comments
ABSTRACT
The tendency of discussing politics in Online Social Networks
(OSNs) has become increasingly growing, especially in election
periods. This growth may be justified by the little restrictive format
of the information to be published and also by many politicians
conducting their respective campaigns on these networks due to
the limitation of the free political advertising time. According to
this trend and to the large amount of data generated by users of
these social networks, the objective of this work is to analyze the
impact of bots during the candidacy of Fernando Haddad and Jair
Messias Bolsonaro in the Brazilian presidential election of 2018 and,
additionally, their possible voters, by using comments collected
from YouTube. Our results demonstrate that, considering all the
unique users of the collected data set, approximately 71.44% of them
were considered undecided, 17.67% as potential Bolsonaro voters
and 10.89% as potential Haddad voters, with no evidence of political
manipulation by bots.
KEYWORDS
Bots, Election, Political Manipulation, Political Votes Estimation,
YouTube

Migrating a System for Event Participation Assistance to the
Microservices Architecture
Monolithic architecture systems, which are systems composed of a
single logical and executable unit, are, in general, hard to scale once
any modification made in a small part of the system requires it to
be rebuilt and redeployed as a whole. One way to ease this aspect,
which is even more problematic in bigger information systems,
is to follow modern low cost architecture proposals, as the one
that advises the microservices usage. However, migrating legacy
monolithic systems specifically to the microservice scenario is a
challenging task, with proposals and background still incipient
within the literature. This work consists of a migration proposal
to the microservice architecture of a monolithic system for event
participation assistance and the comparison of the software quality
between the resulting product and the old version. For the migration results study and evaluation it was applied the metrics lines of
code, comments rate, time of features conclusion and rework rate,
those points to a maintainability degradation caused by the monolith complexity, which doesn’t happen so steeply in the microservice architecture. After all, it is concluded that the microservice
architecture adoption contributed to increased team expectation,
development efficiency, good practices usage inducement, test development ease and speed of feature release to production (Time to
market).

Ropper: A Placement and Routing Framework for Field-Coupled
Nanotechnologies
ABSTRACT
Field-Coupled Nanocomputing technologies are the subject of extensive research to overcome current CMOS limitations. These
technologies include nanomagnetic and quantum structures, each
with its design and synchronization challenges. In this scenario
clocking schemes are used to ensure circuit synchronization and
avoid signal disruptions at the cost of some area overhead. Unfortunatelly, a nanocomputing technology is limited to a small subset of
clocking schemes due to its number of clocking phases and signal
propagation system, thus, leading to complex design challenges
when tackling the placement and routing problem resulting in technology dependant solutions. Our work consists on presenting a
novel framework developed by our team that solves these design
challenges when using distinct schemes, therefore, avoiding the
need to design pre-defined routing algorithms for each one. The
framework offers a technology independent solution and provides
interfaces for the implementation of efficient and scalable placement strategies, moreover, it has full integration with reference
state-of-the-art optimization and synthesis tools.
KEYWORDS
placement, routing, clocking, scheme, framework, synthesis, generic

A Mesh Sensor Network based on Bluetooth: Comparing
Topologies to Crop Monitoring.
Abstract— The growth of the world population increases the demand for food and other products from agriculture. Therefore, it is increasingly needed to enhance
and optimize the productivity of farms. Through using a
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) and the application of
the internet of things (IoT) technologies, we can better
monitor the condition of farm crops. In this work, we
designed a Bluetooth Low Energy mesh network joined
fluorescence sensors for agricultural crop monitoring,
and also we evaluated the suitability of this solution in
a crop field scenario.

Toward Nanometric Scale Integration: An
Automatic Routing Approach for NML Circuits
Abstract—In the recent years, many technologies have been
studied in order to take place as a replacement or complement
to CMOS. These emerging technologies, known as Field Coupled
Nanotechnologies, seek to operate at nanometric scales and overcome the problems that are hard or impossible to be addressed by
CMOS technology. However, these new technologies introduce the
need of developing tools to perform circuit mapping, placement,
and routing. NanoMagnetic Logic Circuit (NML) is one of
these emergent technologies. It relies on the polarization of
nanomagnets to perform operations through majority logic. In
this work we propose an approach to automatically map a gatelevel circuit to a NML layout. We use the Breadth First Search
to perform the placement and the A* algorithm to transverse
the circuit and build the routes for each node. To evaluate
the effectiveness of our approach, we use a series of ISCAS’85
benchmarks. Our results show an area reduction varying from
20% to 60%.

Obstacle-Aware On-Track Bus Routing
Abstract—The great advances achieved in very large scale
integrated technology cause an increase in the difficulty for
routing the buses through the spacing while minimizing the cost.
The term bus defines a communication system that connects
internal components in an integrated circuit. The routing process
consists in placing the wires from the bus on space. There are
some rules, related to wire width, the spacing between obstacles,
routing direction, and others, we need to respect. The routing
process can be separated in global routing and detailed routing.
This paper presents a solution passing in both processes. In the
global routing, we use a differential evolution based approach
in a graph representation of the area to find a brute path of
minimum length to guide the following step. By the next, we use a
greedy selection to place the wires on the tracks. We compare the
results achieved using a classic flux algorithm and three different
mutation operators in differential evolution in global routing.
Index Terms—VLSI, IC, routing, bus, differential evolution

Robust Evolutionary Optimization Algorithm for
Multi-objective Environmental/Economic Dispatch
Problem with Uncertainties
Abstract—The economic load dispatch problem has been
formulated as the minimization of total fuel cost needed to
generate electricity in power plants. Due to the environmental
issues that arise from the emissions of polluting gases produced
by fossil-fueled electric power plants, it becomes the environmental/economic dispatch (EED) multi-objective optimization
problem. EED problems have been most commonly solved using
deterministic models (without considering uncertainties). In this
context, a robust model to cope with uncertainties is necessary,
because the deterministic model is not able to reflect some real
condition in practical applications, since fuel cost and emission
coefficients may be subjected to inaccuracies, for instance. In
this paper, both deterministic and robust EED problem models
are first formulated, and the Robust Evolutionary Optimization
Algorithm - REOA is proposed. For the robust model, the
worst case scenario is estimated, to find reliable solutions that
still feasible and have a good performance under the action of
parametric uncertainties. Comparative studies are carried out to
examine the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Simulation
results are presented for the standard IEEE 30-bus system. The
obtained results are satisfactory compared to the best solutions
found in the literature.
Index Terms—Evolutionary Computation, Environmental/Economic Dispatch Problem, Robust Optimization, MultiObjective Optimization

CGRA HARP: Virtualization of a Reconfigurable
Architecture on the Intel HARP Platform
Abstract—Researches in heterogeneous computing have shown
that the usage of more than one computational node in the
same system increases the performance and decreases the energy
consumption. There are some types of architectures that have
many advantages, both in performance increasing and in energy
efficiency, such as architectures that possess a FPGA as an
accelerating unit. An example of this type of architecture is the
HARP, recently launched by Intel. Currently, in order to use the
HARP’s FPGA, the developer must implement an accelerating
functional unit (AFU) and perform the synthesis of this unity
in the FPGA, but this synthesis may demand a considerable
time, making the architecure unfeasible for a real time system
that requires the FPGA reconfiguration. Thus, in this work it
is presented an abstract layer for the HARP’s FPGA, which
allows the FPGA reconfiguration with no need to perform a new
synthesis, making this architecture feasible for a real time system.

Using an Analog Netlist Generation Tool to
Evaluate a Mixed Circuit Verification Framework
Abstract—The growing demand for powerful integrated circuits in terms of power consumption and processing, creates
a big obstacle for hardware verification engineers to ensure
Integrated Circuit (IC) quality. Actually, IC verification consumes
more than half of the development cycle. And with the growing
complexity, the verification also increases. When we consider
analog blocks in mixed-signal ICs we have an even more
challenging verification process. Unfortunately, the environments
for mixed-signal verification are inefficient because it is not
possible to generate realistic analog outputs to the digital blocks
inputs during simulation. This work evaluates ALIAS, a tool that
generates digital abstractions of analog circuits for verification.
To evaluate ALIAS efficiency we have created an ADC and DAC
netlist tool generator, to perform verification in different mixedsignal scenarios and circuit configurations.
Index Terms—Verification, Analog Circuit Abstraction, Converter, ALIAS, ADC, DAC.

A hardware accelerator implementation for
real-time collision detection
Index Terms—Parallel Processor, Hardware Accelerator, Computer Architecture, Collision Detection
I. ABSTRACT
Collision detection algorithms are used to detect when
virtual objects collide and the results of these collisions.
This type of algorithm is used by many research areas such
as simulation. automatic path finding, tolerance checking,
among others. This type of algorithm is processed in realtime. Intel created the HARP Platform which uses a PCI
with 8GB/s bandwidth, this decreased the memory latency
allowing real-time processing of fine grain applications
such as collision detection algorithms. In this paper we
propose a heterogeneous system in order to use the FPGA
on the HARP as an accelerator for collision detection
algorithms. Our results show a speedup of 14.5% in
execution time.

EasyTest: An approach for automatic test cases
generation from UML Activity Diagrams
Abstract—The test cases generation is one of the great
challenges for the Software Test Community because of
the development efforts and costs to create, validate and
test a large number of test cases. The automation of this
process increases testing productivity and reduce labor
hours. One technique that has been adopted to automate
test cases generation is Model Based Testing (MBT). This
paper proposes the EasyTest approach to generate test
cases from UML Activity Diagrams aiming to integrate
Modeling, Coding and Test stages in a software process
and to reduce costs and development efforts. The proposed
approach suggests an early detection of defects even in
the modeling stage to prevent that unidentified defects are
embedded in the coding stage. The work also presents
the use of the generated test cases before and after the
coding stage. To verify the proposed approach, this work
also presents the EasyTest Tool to provide interoperability
with the JUnit framework.
Keywords-Test Automation; Model Based Testing; GrayBox Testing; JUnit; TDD.

A Genetic Algorithm for Multi-Component Optimization
Problems: the Case of the Travelling Thief Problem
ABSTRACT
Real-world problems many times are characterized by being composed by multiple interdependent components. In
this case, benchmark problems that do not represent that
interdependency are not a good choice to assess algorithms
performance. Recently in the literature a benchmark problem called Travelling Thief Problem was proposed to better represent real-world multi-component problems. TTP is
a combination of two well-known problems: 0-1 Knapsack
Problem (KP) and the Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP).
This paper presents a genetic algorithm-based optimization
approach called Multi-Component Genetic Algorithm (MCGA)
for solving TTP. The ideia is solve the overall problem instead of each sub-component separately. Starting from solution for the TSP component, obtained by the Chained
Lin-Kernighan heuristic, the MCGA applies the evolutionary process (evaluation, selection, crossover, and mutation)
iteratively using different operators for KP and TSP components. The MCGA was tested on some representative
instances of TTP available in the literature. The comparisons show that MCGA obtains competitive solutions for
TTP instances with a number of cities between 51 and 783.
General Terms
Algorithms
Keywords
Travelling Thief Problem; Genetic Algorithm; Combinatorial problem optimization